it is pretty clear partnerless men
childless men they don't do so well in
fact they do terribly and in modern
society that's the problem Richard
Reeves is the founder of the American
Institute for boys and men an
organization dedicated to researching
and tackling the challenges faced by
boys and men in modern society we're in
the early stages of a cultural
revolution so that women are not
economically reliant on men which is
great but one consequence of that is
that it's put a big question mark next
to the role of men which used to be
filled with a whole script of ways to be
a man ways to be a head of household Etc
because of that they're struggling
they're behind in education wages have
stagnated you're seeing a massive rise
of young men who are single and now the
suicide rate is four times higher and
Rising they looked at the words that men
used to describe themselves before
taking their own lives and the two most
commonly used words were useless and
worthless and the most fatal place to
end up in as a human being is to feel
unneeded
you said the hardest thing you've ever
done as a man is coup's therapy why I
was talking about what I done at home
and how it's supported her career and my
wife said that you seem to think the
problem is that you're not feminist
enough the problem is that you're not
masculine enough what I came to realize
is that men feel like that in order for
women to become bigger we had to make
ourselves smaller that is not the answer
so what would you do at a social level
to fix things the most important move
would be to
we've just hit 6 million subscribers on
the D Co um so me and my team would like
to do something we've never done before
as little thank you and we're calling it
The D subscriber raffle and here is how
it works every episode this month we're
going to pick three current subscribers
at random and we'll send one of you a
1,000 voucher one of you tickets to come
and watch the D SE behind the scenes
live with our team and one of you will
have a 10-minute phone call with me to
discuss whatever you want to talk about
if you're a subscriber you're in the
raffle thank you from the botom of my
heart for allowing me to do something
that me and my team love doing so much
it is the greatest honor of my lifetime
and I hope it I hope it continues uh off
into the Future Let's get to the
[Music]
episode Richard you wrote a book called
of boys and men why the modern male is
struggling and why it matters and what
to do about
it of all the things you could have
done why why did you do this partly
because I was warned so strongly against
it by my colleagues by friends but
professionally just saying this is such
a difficult subject to write about
particularly right now in this sort of
moment we're in culturally and and the
reason I say I did it despite being
warned or because I was warned isn't
because I'm like a sucker for punishment
I'm actually like very thin skinned
interestingly my wife said that in some
ways I was in the worst of all worlds
because I I'm thin skinned pist so in
other words a p someone who kind of goes
out of their way to kind of make
provocative points right and provocative
so I provoke responses but then I'm kind
of upset the responses right and and
actually this this work around boys and
men is not is not intended at all to be
provocative ironically I'm trying to
make it less provocative I'm trying to
make it more databased more mainstream
like more boring in a way um but it was
very interesting to me and it was very
hard to get a publisher in the US for
the book and so it was interesting to me
that this whole debate was one that was
just seen as too risky to enter and I I
honestly thought well hang on if I as a
fairly boring guy with
charts and research and being warned
against this who is going to talk about
it and are we sure that it's better that
those other people are talking about it
and that we're not talking about it
we're basically benching ourselves from
the conversation because of our fear
about what's going to happen to us
professionally or reputationally we're
basically benching ourselves and that
just leaves the ground open and if you
think there's a real issue around boys
and men real questions around boys and
men it's not like it's not going to be
talked about that's not the question the
question is who's talking about it and I
actually thought we need more people
like me talking about it I.E boring
research-based policy oriented you know
non-fiction type people Brookings type
people and not just some of the people
who are currently talking about online
and that's not there are lots of great
people talking about this online don't
mistake me but but it's almost like it
wasn't a topic that you were supposed to
approach unless you were willing to risk
something and that just seems crazy to
me when you say you come from this from
a place of stats graphs figures Etc what
is your background where does that come
from I bounced around essentially
between Academia think tanks politics
journalism so when I was over here I was
in the UK until 201 12 and uh I'd served
in the coalition government working as
director of strategy for Nick CLE before
that I'd run demos the think tank I'd
worked I'd written for the guardian and
the Observer I'd worked at IPP I'd
worked at The Institute of Psychiatry I
did a PhD in philosophy at Warick and so
I basically found myself in this space
where either I'm trying to make policy
or I'm writing about policy or I'm
trying to think about policy in that
sort of semi-academic space and so I'm a
kind of social Scientist by experience I
guess rather than by training uh and
that led me to the Brookings institution
in DC where I was for 10 years working
on Race inequality class inequality and
Brookings is like a big blue chip you
know policy Think Tank place it's you
regularly ranked as the the most
important think tank in the world
whatever that means today I I don't know
H and so in a way that was a kind of
natural place for me to end up and so
yeah I I come at this and I'm very
nonpartisan so I try to be as fact-based
as as possible I'm not partisan but I am
very very concerned about trying to do
what we can to reduce the obstacles that
people face to human flourishing I know
that sounds really like vague but that's
what's Driven all of my work and you run
the institute for boys and men yeah the
American Institute for boys and men it's
actually the first Think Tank like
research policy shop on this issue
certainly in the US and arguably
anywhere uh we've had lots of
Institutions quite rightly created to
look at issues for women and girls and
we need those arguably we need more of
them in many parts of the world but we
haven't actually thought that it was
important to have any that specifically
look at the issues of boys and men
through a kind of research lens and a
policy lens and so in the end I felt
like that was necessary and then I was
persuaded that I I had to do it myself I
actually looked quite hard for other
ways to get someone else to do it
because it was a difficult move when was
the moment where you decided that this
was the object that you were going to
tackle was there was there a a stat you
read a moment you had a a Eureka moment
of sorts or was it just a culmination of
things it was more of a culmination
there was just a series of Statistics
that I just kept running into and not
just stumbling over but sort of just
running into with my shin bruising my
shin and going wait really and then
checking those stats with people and and
most of them I had a sense of the
direction but I didn't know how big some
of the the changes had become so for
example discovering that there's like a
bigger gender gap in higher education
now than there was in the 70s but it's
other way around so we kind of
completely flipped the gender gap in in
higher education or or learning that the
suicide rate is four times higher among
uh men uh and boys and and Rising but
you know I think I was already on this
track when Co hit but actually Co what
probably underlined my determination
to keep doing it because in the US at
least the immediate impact of Co was
huge for boys and men the college en
rment uh rate dropped seven times more
for men in the US than than for women
and then I noticed that men were dying
in much bigger numbers from covid and no
one was really researching that so I
found myself doing research on covid
death rates which is not my field at all
because it wasn't being done elsewhere
and those sorts of moments Illustrated
to me that
it wasn't anybody's job to wake up each
morning and think about how is this
thing in this case the pandemic how is
it affecting boys and men it was no
one's job to do that and so those stats
that I've just mentioned to you they
didn't get any
attention because no one was drawing
attention to them whereas the impact of
the covid-19 pandemic on girls and women
was getting a lot of attention because
lots of people were producing you good
reports on that what is the the sort of
the macro then on on the current state
of boys and men if if I had never if I
just landed on this planet and I was an
alien and I said to you how are men
getting on comparatively versus how they
used to be getting
on what information would you supply to
me to make your case and what would you
say to me so assume we're going to talk
about Advanced economy so we're going to
talk about the UK the US Scandinavia Etc
I think a fair answer there would be to
say that there are many ways in which
boys and men are struggling in those
societies
they're behind in education for sure
wages have stagnated especially if
they're working class the mental health
challenges of men are playing out
differently but in some ways more
tragically because of these very high
suicide rates so in the UK suicide is
the biggest killer of men under the age
of 45 so playing out differently for
women and girls but I think I'd probably
say we're in the relatively early stages
of a cultural revolution in advanced
economies and that Revolution is one
where the economic relation between men
and women has been dramatically
transformed and so the old world my My
Father's World my father just turn turns
80 today and um the world that he and my
mom have occupied was one where their
roles are just much more tightly defined
right it was a kind of it wasn't really
that much of a question about what their
roles were going to be and women had
just so little economic power that they
were essentially forced into
relationships marriages like with men
right and so there was this economic
dependency of women women on men and I
would argue an emotional dependency of
men on women and of course a huge
Reliance on women to kind of raise the
kids but there was there was like a
script there was a story there was a way
the economic rise of women has achieved
what Gloria steinm set out to achieve
which is to make marriage a choice
rather than a necessity that argument
which was really about changing the
economic relation between men and women
so that women weren't economically
reliant on men that was the central I
think central argument of that wave of
the women's movement
and very largely achieved and I would
argue that's probably the greatest
economic Liberation in human history is
still playing out we need to do more in
other parts of the world but one
consequence of that is to then put a big
question mark next to the role of
men right so I think underpinning a lot
of these issues that we see kind of
playing out for boys and men is really
just there's just a gap yeah there's a
space with a question mark in it now
whereas which used to be filled with
whole script of ways you know ways to be
a man ways to be a dad ways to be a head
of household Etc and so we've torn up
those old scripts by and large in these
advanced economies which is great but I
would say that we've replaced the old
script that women had the one my mom had
right so the script my mom had was
you're going to be a wife and a mother
primarily she was also a nurse but
parttime and so skip forward one
generation to my sister my my wife wife
my female friends and it was you're
going to be able to stand on your own
two
feet right so in the blink of an eye we
changed the story for women in a way
that I think is profoundly positive and
how did we change the story for men the
old story my father's story you're going
to have to do as well as you can because
you're going to have to look after a
family you know make some money provide
right that's going to be your role so we
took away that story because we don't
know if he's going to be the provider
anymore I've certainly not been the main
provider
certainly not all of the time in in my
relationships and what did we replace it
with what's the new script for
masculinity what's the new set of roles
what's the new set of Dos that we've got
for men You could argue we've got quite
a lot of don'ts many of which we
need but not a very long list of Dos and
so I think that that sense of that
category being that question mark now
being open has just a left a lot of men
feeling a drift uncertain of their role
uncertain of their place uncertain of
being needed wanted uh and I think
that's that's feeding into a lot of the
things that are easier to measure like
mental health education employment Etc
but underlying it I I I think it's this
coming to terms with this huge
Revolution that we've
seen I I want to make sure by the end of
this conversation we do our very best to
Haz it a guess at what that list of dos
are for men but also to kind of fill
that question mark I get so many women
and men come up to me often talking
about their young
Sons um and encouraging me to have more
conversations like this because they
want a good script for their young sons
in a world where their young sons are
going online and being offered maybe a
not so good script yes by certain
influences and influencers online so
that's that's one of my objectives with
having these conversations and I I think
it's worth pausing there just to say
that from looking at your work you're
not suggesting we go backwards to the
old way of things no that's part of the
challenge is
that there's in some ways an
understandable reaction to change that
is disorienting it's destabilizing it
maybe threatens a sense of status among
men and to reach back for the world as
it once was very recently right this is
not we don't have to go back Millennia
probably only have to go back one
generation or two generations to men had
their roles women had their roles
everyone knew their place and you can
see the appeal of that when there's just
so much
uncertainty but emphatically not the
answer to go back and I think in this
debate what you very often feel as if
those who are perhaps on that more
conservative side of the argument they
want to kind of turn back the clock
especially on women and women's roles
but I would say on the other side of the
argument maybe more on the Progressive
side of the argument or liberal side of
the argument in American terms there's a
bit of a sort of turning a blind eye to
the actual problems of boys and men yeah
and so I think for a lot of young men
and I you know having spoken to them and
had some responses to my work from them
they feel as if there are two fairly
unappetizing options on the table for
them from the right they get the message
of like you should be more like your
father or your grandfather be a real man
right provide protect Etc have a wife
that can stay at home you fill in the
Gap but then they from the left the
message they get is you should be more
like your sister the problem with your
masculinity is your masculinity and we
should just basically you should be more
like a woman right um and actually it's
not surprising to me that most young men
who are strongly in favor of gender
equality right they've grown up with it
there's no evidence they're turning
against it so they want gender equality
but they also there's something about
the way they feel in the world that
means that they don't want to be treated
as something there's something wrong
with them because they're a man right
and I think for even especially in
school RS but maybe more broadly there's
a danger that we
treat men like malfunctioning
women so your problem is you're not
feminine enough you're not caring enough
you're not nurturing enough you're not
emotionally vulnerable enough you don't
cry enough you don't spend enough time
with your kids you're and I'm not saying
those aren't all valid challenges but if
that's all we've got if in other words
we're just defining positive masculinity
in a way that is completely synonymous
with
femininity I'm not surprised we're
driving we're seeing a lot of young men
in particular say well no I'm not
interested in that and the only other
thing else they can see on offer is this
more
reactionary alternative and so if we
give them that choice
between being feminine and being
reactionary it's not clear to me that
they're all going to choose the former
it's interesting because the way that
the digital world the algorithms the
social media are designed is to kind of
push you towards camps so this like
space in the middle of nuance it's just
not going to get the likes the retweets
the engagement in fact it's the the
ideas on the outside the men should be
more feminine or men should be extremely
masculine that are going to get all of
the attention because of the way the
gorithms are designed so if the if the
answer is some kind of nuanced position
in the middle I just can't see in a
world how that's ever going to form a
tribe and be rewarded by the algorithm
so you know this is this is part of the
the beauty I guess of having podcast
conversations because you can because
we're not really held hostage by an
algorithm here we can kind of you know
speak openly but most of the algorithms
don't work in such a way at the heart of
this issue though I think is a very
difficult question which is are men and
women different okay well let's let's
come to that but can I go back to your
previous point because I think you're
you're underselling yourself in a
way I agree that the way the algorithm
Works drives the kind of short-term
attention towards those more tribal
simplistic but the mere fact of your
success and the success of others like
you to me is an incredibly positive sign
it suggests to me that actually there is
an appetite for more nuanced
conversation there is is an appetite for
recognizing that two things can be true
at once and that there are tradeoffs
like a is mostly good like the rise of
women amazing some causing some issues
that we should deal with and I have to
tell you my own experience of this as a
you know we've established boring chart
driven policy wonk type person right I
did this video for big think the YouTube
platform and it's had more comments than
I've sold copies of of the book oh wow
different audience of course my wife
calls me I'm traveling somewhere and she
says have you read the comments on your
video and I said of course not like I'm
old school journalist never read the
comments should no we got to we started
reading them together by the end of that
taxi Journey wherever I was we're both
in tears because what the what we found
was young men including some teenage
boys saying thank you for recognizing
that the problems that boys and young
men are facing are real but not saying
and therefore become a reactionary
misogynist actually saying guys this is
a difficult time there is some
transitions we've got to think about you
know come to your question about are
they different that we are different in
some ways that we have to talk about but
that in no way means we should be trying
to turn back the progress of women the
solution to your problem as a young man
is not to make your sister less powerful
or independent and there's a huge
appetite for that it's just hard to
articulate it doesn't drive the
algorithm but I I I honestly the
conversations you've had around this
that other people are having around this
giv me a lot of hope that actually most
young men out there want that real
conversation but it does I agree it has
to start with a recognition of the fact
that there there are differences on
average between men and women and I
can't remember who said this it might
have been this Swedish Public Health
Economist called Hans rosling who I
absolutely love he's passed away now but
it might have been him it's the sort of
thing he would have said and I'm
paraphrasing it with something like the
world would be much better if everyone
could understand the idea of an
overlapping
distribution everyone we're all train if
you say men are taller than women most
people know what that means
right on average like no if you say men
are taller than women no one in their
right mind thinks it means every man is
taller than every woman right yeah no no
one thinks that they know that that
means mostly so most of the men over
most of the people over six foot a male
you know the average man is taller than
two-thirds of women or you know whatever
it is right so two and that's what most
sex differences are like they're not
completely separate or completely the
same they just they have overlapping
distributions and so on average men
might be a little bit less likely to cry
that's true but it doesn't mean that
there aren't some very weepy men some of
whom I think you've had on this
podcast right and who knows where this
conversation's going right or or some
women who are less likely to and we
could we could take in aggression we
could take in risk-taking we could take
in sex drive we could take in
competitiveness and and uh we could take
in more interest in things rather than
people and put all of those on this sort
of distribution and just say look we can
accept there are differences on average
ask if they really matter and in what
way and then never use that as a way to
discriminate against an individual so
were men and women different on average
yeah and and in what ways are they
different that are pertinent to this
conversation you know when we talk
about it's really
about societal roles and gender roles
that I'm I'm getting to here because
when we talk about the changes that have
happened and also when we get to the
heart of what a man's script should be
yeah there must be clues in how we are
different if you know what I mean yeah
the way I think about this is that if
there are these differences on
average in say say risk taking yeah cuz
men are the ones that are I saw the
stats like 90% of men are um 90% of
people that have like gambling
addictions for example are men yeah so
it definitely opens up all kinds so that
there's let's take on average men boys
and men somewhat more likely to take
risks right so let's take that as an
example like does it
matter um well it does matter in some
negative ways because like you just
identified look there's an addiction
issue there's also like teenage boys
like twice as likely to die as teenage
girls from from from risk-taking
activity by and large from car crashes
or accidents you know much more like to
drown all these kinds of things right
because they're just taking more risks
right and
so that aspect of kind of risk taking
and especially if the risk involves
somebody else's life or well-being
obviously that's a problem but if the
risk-taking means that say they're on
average a little bit more likely to kind
of take a risk in
business right or they're more likely to
sign up to be a smoke jumper in the US
do you know what a smoke jumper is no
idea you're going to love this what is
it a smoke jumper is someone you know
have these wildfires out in kind of west
of the US yeah right in California and
places like that and very remote places
sometimes the only way to fight the fire
is to parachute people into the middle
of the fire or just close to the fire in
the middle of nowhere out of a plane so
you basically these are people who for a
living parachute out of perfectly
serviceable airplanes into a raging
Inferno and stay there for as many days
as necessary to try and fight the fire
incredibly
dangerous uh and it's almost all men
okay it's hard for me to imagine a world
where it wouldn't be mostly men
selecting into that occupation because
it's very high risk right and you could
think of others is that okay probably
right you don't want to exclude anybody
but you're also not going to freak out
that that one's not kind of 5050 and
you're also going to say well that's
that's good mhm and on the risk take
actually you I think you'll be
interested in I like to get your
reaction to this because I was very
interested to discover that if you this
is based on on one study to be clear but
I liked the study that companies that
are led by
women as in CEO and CFO yeah both women
are a bit less likely to go bankrupt
yeah than ones run by men I know you
were going to say before you said the
stats but a little bit less profitable
so yeah you know what you were going to
say before you said the stats because my
experience has been that exactly kind of
what you described in the sense that the
the CEO of my company now is a woman and
the co of my group of companies is a
woman um and in my
experience men have a higher risk
appetite as it relates
to company finances typically um a
little bit more yeah prone to risk and
so you know for me the Bal the real real
important thing has been combining that
set of perspectives so we get the
balance exactly so people could I think
you've drawn the right conclusion from
your own experience which
is it's like you some people look at
that data right I I'll be unfair to
about they'd say well of course look
look at these profitable companies led
by men these entrepreneurial risk-taking
men that's why men have to be running
all the companies right and these women
they're just they're just too you know
safetyism they you know they're they're
just too scaredy cat right for
capitalism right so let's have them in
and the other view would be like hey
look at all these women Le companies
that don't go under as often don't go
bankrupt sure they're a bit less
profitable but you know they're less
risky so we should have women running
companies or your conclusion which is
given that there's probably likely
benefits to both sides of that and again
recognizing it's not all women and all
men like maybe we should have diverse
leadership teams that seems to me to be
the right conclusion from that but the
conclusion is itself the argument for
gender
diversity are based on the Assumption
there must be some differences yeah if
there weren't differences why on Earth
would we care yeah about gender
diversity right if we don't think that
women and men bringing something
different to the party not just because
their life experience but like something
else a bit different but risk- taking
competition Etc if we didn't think that
mattered then we wouldn't care how many
board members were women but we do care
about that quite rightly because we
presume that actually there are some
differences between men and women and so
sometimes that the idea that there are
differences between men and women is
seen as a conservative idea but weirdly
it underpins a lot of the progressive
movements for gender diversity it's so
true it's so very true and um this is
why it is difficult to talk about the
differences between men and women at a
physiological level without it appearing
to be like inherently sexist because
it's not to say that either is better or
worse it's just to say that there's
differences and I think it goes back to
what I was saying to understand the
script for male to fill in that question
mark there must be some Clues hidden in
our biology there must be
because I I think there is because I'm
trying to you know it's interesting as a
I'm I'm 31 years old now and my my
girlfriend is 31 years old and in the
the way that the world has changed I'm
still trying to figure out if like me
holding the door open for her is me
being old school and old fashioned and a
bit misogynist or if that's be that
because that's what I want to do and she
likes it does she she loves it that's
the big question of course you wouldn't
still be together I want to do that and
she loves it and she she will have
moments where she turns to me and tells
me she'll thank me for doing things like
that and she'll thank me for the way
that I am and she'll acknowledge that my
brain and her brain have two completely
different perspectives on the world and
it's it's the differences that make us
work you know because I'm I come to
everything super logical how can I fix
it baby it's like I show up with like a
spanner to every problem in our
relationship and she has this much more
holistic she almost has like this sixth
emot emotional sense and together we
like navigate issues really well um but
we can't it does but it does require to
respect those differences and not see
see the old problem was one was seen as
better than the other yeah right so that
kind of lets know with all the caveats
about averages an overlapping
distribution so let's agree now that we
by this point in the conversation
anybody listening to this gets that when
we say these things we're not saying all
men or all women right yeah if there are
differences the problem in the past was
let's say men were a bit more
risk-taking a bit more competitive a bit
more inclined to kind of rational uh
approaches to problems that that was
better yeah that's the definition in my
mind a useful definition of a patriarchy
a patriarchy is one where more typically
masculine virtues or attributes are seen
as better right and you could argue that
a matriarchy wor we to have one would be
the other way around and an equal
Society isn't one of
androgyny it's one where they're treated
as of equal value so we don't say one is
better than the other we say they're
different and try and bring them into
kind of collaborative and constructive
and rather beautiful equality but I do
think a lot of people making the mistake
of thinking that equality requires
androgyny I find your door opening one
really interesting so I was I was raised
to when you're walking along a a street
to always with a woman always to put
yourself roadside yes you do that always
yeah why did you do that um I don't know
now you've said it but I remember when I
was crossing the road
yesterday um my first instinct was to
reach back and grab her hand and ba uh
and basic because there was like a big
bus coming and then there was this black
cab coming and my instinct was to solve
that problem which was like to put
myself in the front of the taxi maybe I
I think in head because I thought this
was the only conscious element to it my
body's bigger so the taxi will see me my
girlfriend's about a foot smaller than
me and she's really really small so I
thought maybe the taxi would see me and
also there's a protective element it's
two things it's if I put myself in front
of the taxi that's coming it will see me
better but also I kind of would rather
take the hit yeah but that wasn't you
didn't you didn't think all that no I
didn't it's a it's a reaction I have
right that's all coded in you yeah and
you and you and you see it actually even
in tragic circumstances in the US when
you see these kind of mass shooting
incidents when they do the kind of when
they reconstruct Afters what we very
often see is that quite often men have
been killed when they're just
automatically putting their body between
the shooter and their girlfriend or
somebody usually a woman right and uh
and there's also this great there's a
great uh photograph of a baseball
heading towards this a kid right it's
been whacked really hard and it's
heading towards this kid and and there
and you see these two guys doing this
like in the shop they're like diving in
front of it um whereas the moms are kind
of like doing this like the dads are
like they're protecting the kids yeah
and whoever's going to get hit by it
right and and again they weren't they
didn't think through oh my body's big I
it's just a reaction and the and this
the road one is very interesting and
again most the women that I've been with
I don't say anything I just I just do it
I just go roadside and that's because
the road could be that could get
splashed it's dirty so it could be like
a sh shivalry thing it's about but also
think more that there's more danger
there like if someone comes off the road
or something like so to the extent that
just at some psychological level danger
more danger that side right you want to
put yourself between that and the woman
that you're with and it's happening at a
quite a natural level now is there any
danger there does it make any kind of
sense probably not but is it still
symbolically quite a good thing and my
answer would be yes
and I I don't I know not everyone's
going to agree with this but I I've come
to believe that some of those symbolic
acts which are quite gendered are still
valuable even in a world where we want
absolute substantive gender equality and
so the test would be you hold the door
for a woman who's your
boss and that's okay you're okay with
the fact that having gone through the
door she goes to the CEO Suite right and
she's okay with the fact that even
though she's the CEO and your boss you
held the door for her and so I sometimes
fear that in our desire to sort of
squeeze out all of these symbolic
differences we lose a little bit of
those symbols of difference which even
in a world of complete gender equality
which we're hopefully getting closer to
I don't know if we want to eradicate
them and I increasingly I find a lot of
young women not NE not wanting to
eradicate them they just they want us to
hold many of them want us to hold the
door but then by God help them rise up
the corporate ladder if that's necessary
and have no problem at all with them
being our boss them them being boss to
us that's what they ask of us I think
that's a reasonable thing for them to
ask we could do that
right what's the rebuttal to that is it
that holding the door is a symbol of
like the patriarchy and it's a a symbol
of Oppression and that I I am you need
me she's too weak to open the door okay
but actually I've noticed there got a
lot of feminists now they're like I've
seen this a bit on on social media
they're like for the love of God guys
feminism doesn't mean you shouldn't
offer to help me get my overhead down on
the plane you are taller you are
stronger get my bag down right
and and like I do think and you've seen
a bit of reluctance around that merely
because I think men are almost entirely
wrongly afraid if they offer right that
the woman will turn to them and say why
because I'm weaker than you right that's
by the way that's never going to happen
almost never going to happen um but she
might say no I'm good thanks I'm fine
right but spe if it's obviously a
shorter woman or a kind of you older
woman or even a man right but but more
and so I think that's a kind of danger
is that some of this has kind of
descended into this kind of these
symbols are bad uh meanwhile we got so
much more work to do to get more women
on boards and you know increase female
safety that it sort of feels like too
much politics has become locked in these
symbolic things you said that you think
one of the biggest issues facing men
today is the issue of
suicide especially as youve you
published this book but in in your own
personal life have you been exposed to
those stories of the the impact of
suicide directly yeah yeah people rarely
talk about
it in an open Forum but they will very
often afterwards talk about it and I had
this moment recently someone I'm
actually working with and I've been
working with for some time I did a I did
a little piece on Morning Joe which is a
daytime thing in the US and I talked
about this crisis of kind of male
suicide and she told me afterwards that
they put up a just a stat the four times
higher among men just a a graphic and
she said she burst into
tears and she said I'm so grateful
you're doing this work I lost my son to
suicide when he was 16 and started
telling me kind of why and I I had
worked with this woman for years on this
issue and she'd never raised it with me
before I had no idea and I Now
understand why particularly given her
situation she's been so supportive of my
work it wasn't just an intellectual
thing this is very rarely just an
intellectual thing it's usually visceral
as well there's usually something going
on there and I've had countless stories
like that people sharing their stories
and it's heartbreaking and and you've
had you know people on this show who
talk quite a lot about this Jordan
Peterson was asked in a in an event once
by this guy who said I'm thinking I I
delayed my Suicide to come and hear you
talk why should I not take my own life
no I haven't had anything like that but
it's there this crisis is there in our
communities playing out is there a I'm
just thinking about that woman who's
been working with you supporting your
work but hadn't said
anything and I'm wondering why people
don't say something about about it when
it happens in their family with with
other deaths with with a cancer death
you'll see a Facebook post you'll see a
a whatever you'll see you know but it
seems I'm wondering here if there's a
different level
of I don't know public sharing as it
relates to suicide because it's a
different type of death isn't it it's
one that creates a lot of guilt and
feelings guil and shame and like so
you're in her situation and I have to
tell you having raised boys one of whom
in particular really struggled with his
mental health through teen years there
are days where you just hope as a parent
that they're still around and you
think what it was and actually 16 and
we've seen a huge rise in in young young
men's suicides in the US especially and
just think if you're a
parent and you lose a child to Suicide
the idea that you can
cannot Free Yourself of the burden of
what could I have done what did I miss
was it me right being a parent is
already a lifelong trip in rethinking
your decisions right and you add that to
the mix
I I I can't imagine it I mean my my
parents lost a daughter very young to a
heart defect and they have an amazing
marriage and they've been amazing
parents but I do think that the loss to
this illness this terrible tragedy thing
it's just different cyc not it's hugely
grief but you but it doesn't turn them
like it turns the mirror on you it's
like was this you was this your fault
are you the reason your son is
dead just think about that for a moment
and what that kind of does to people um
um and so because of that people don't
talk about it so you'll get died
unexpectedly yeah we're not willing to
talk about it in the same way as we are
others because we think it might reflect
on us in some way perhaps or on the
memory of that person or them yeah I
mean it's still a crime technically oh
is
it now people say it's a really
interesting thing I've really learned
not to say commit suicide yeah died by
Suicide died by Suicide I just wanted to
I've got some crazy Unthinkable stats
here that I wanted to just add on top of
what you were saying which come from The
Institute of boys and men report that
really was staggering to me is that um a
man dies by Suicide approximately every
13 minutes in the US yes in the United
States alone so that's not including
other countries and the UK the US okay
if men's suicide rates had matched those
of women's approximately 545,000 fewer
men would have died since
1999 and that's again just in the US
just us half a million men
yeah suicide rates amongst younger men
have grown the fastest the growth of
male suicides has occurred almost
entirely since the beginning of 2010s
mhm and interestingly as well rural
countries in the USA have higher rates
of suicide than those in urban Metro so
it highlights again that suicidality is
geographically distributed in in certain
ways
why what's going on here what's going on
with this full picture why why why is
this the state of suicide amongst
men in some ways the decision to end
your own life obviously it's complex and
it varies but in some ways it's like the
ultimate signal that you don't feel as
if the world is better off with you than
without
you like so many people who take their
own lives lose their lives to Suicide
will say something like like you'll be
better off without me I've been a burden
to you I know I've been difficult they
convinced themselves that they're not
wanted they not needed and some that
goes back to like Arthur Miller's play
Death of a Salesman Willie
lman takes his own life because he
thinks that the life insurance his
family will get will be will be a better
bread winner than he can be because he's
so badly failed in his primary
responsibility as a as a bread winner so
it's not a new idea but there's a really
nice piece a work by Fiona Shand she's
an Australian researcher and the the
work was done primarily in Australia
where they looked at the words that men
who did take their own lives used to
describe themselves before doing so or
in some cases attempting to but usually
when men attempt suicide they do lose
their lives and the two most commonly
used words by those men who took their
own lives were about themselves were
useless and
worthless now of course this is a sample
of people who went on to take their own
lives but it's
nonetheless I think very powerful
statement that to get to that stage you
you don't think you have
worth you don't think you have
use you don't think you're
needed and I believe that the most fatal
place to end up in as a human being is
to feel
unneeded I think to be
needed is arguably the most important
and constant human requirement and so if
you end up feeling like I'm not need I
me my family don't need
me my employer doesn't need me my
community doesn't need me I am Surplus
to requirements if anything I'm a drag
on my parents or my
community I'm not adding value however
you define value to the people around me
I'm taking away from
it that's I that's the psychologic iCal
trajectory that seems to put a lot of
men towards this path and well short of
suicide I think many of the other mental
health problems we see among men
addiction checking out in one way or
another coming out of the labor market
Etc they're not the most extreme form of
course of of checking out by literally
taking your own life but they are a
different form of that they are a
different way of kind of benching
yourself taking yourself out of the
equation because of a sense of like well
who needs me anyway right and so I just
think in a way that the suicide
statistics are in some ways the kind of
tip of the iceberg of the sense that
many men have a feeling
unneeded unwanted is there an
evolutionary basis for why men or humans
I guess need to be needed amongst their
Community do you think have you thought
about that at all yeah well when we
started operating in tribes of course
like we we realized we were going to
sink or swim together right or hunt hunt
or die together maybe is a better way to
put it and so what that meant was being
needed by your
community or and or your family was kind
of central to The Human Experience so
the kind of invention of th those bonds
and the difference is that for women
particularly once they become mothers or
if they're intending to become mothers
the question of like whether I'll be
needed is never asked in quite the same
way because you you literally needed to
grow children and give birth to them and
feed them right and so that kind of very
rooted sense of being needed for the for
the species I think it's just it's just
more obvious with women but why do we
need men why do we need dads and that's
a much more kind of recent phenomenon in
the sense of being dads and the answer
is because actually there's this amazing
work by an Anna Machin she's a an
anthropologist at the University of
Oxford about fatherhood and she she's so
I'm just paraphrasing her now but she
has this wonderful description of How We
Invented
fatherhood because we went bipedal do
you know all this and the baby's head
thing it's amazing so we we had this bit
of a crisis X hundreds of thousands of
years ago I'm terrible at remembering
whether it's millions or hundreds of
thousands so timeo Google it right back
back in the ancestral times is what
people say right right so what happened
was we had this massive growth SP in our
brains our heads right so we got massive
heads but we also went bipedal and if
you're bipedal your hip hi can't be that
big and so we women couldn't get the
heads of the babies out of their smaller
hips right so we're actually facing a
bit of a crisis so the way we solved
that crisis was by giving birth to
babies way earlier than we
should way way ear in fact if we were
like other mammals uh pregnancies would
last about two
years so I don't know how women watching
will feel about that can't speak to that
but 2 years would be about the average
right we don't we obviously do it N9
months so they're incredibly vulnerable
and mom has to literally keep feeding
them right and the calorific
requirements just the amount of food
that they need mom and baby was huge and
so dad go get food right this is only
going to work we're only going to
survive as humans if this stuff comes so
in a way that was the invention of
fatherhood and you see the brains of
fathers you know getting activated by
all this stuff so being needed by the
community family Etc to produce
something to provide something is I I I
think it's just deeply encoded it's it's
encoded in our DNA it's like part of
like if we're not needed then we're dead
because we're going to be on our own
right so these these ties familial ties
tribal ties are are actually Central to
our identity and so the danger now is
that if people particularly Men start to
feel
like am I needed does the community need
me do my kids need me does the woman
I've had my children with
need me am I
needed if the answer to that is not
clear I think that has all kinds of
Downstream consequences and we've just
done a really poor job of making sure
that even in this time of great
transition we still need you we need
every man every boy every everybody we
need you we don't yet know exactly what
we need you for but by God we need you
we cannot afford to lose you you are
precious and we need you you know you I
don't know what going to go on to be yet
but by God our community cannot afford
to lose you and so that message of just
like how much we need you I just think
we've lost a little bit of that in
recent debates and too many men have
drawn the conclusion that maybe they
aren't
needed with tragic
consequences a few questions there just
because I want to make sure I'm clear
Fiona's work in Australia around these
letters that men had left before they
had died by
Suicide did she also look at the letters
that women had left no she only looked
at men in okay fine that's my first
question and for me the the
key thing in in the suicide stats is
that it's
increasing it's increasing so if we're
saying that it's a case of men not
feeling needed then why is that sense
that men aren't needed increasing if if
we're saying there's some kind of link
between those two ideas yes
because the extent to which they're
needed is less Les clear now than it was
right so it was very clear before that
you're needed because you're the bread
winner okay you're the provider right so
go back and I don't NE I think part of
the point here is that this idea of
being kind of this gets us into
discussions about masculinity but by
being generative like producing
providing it gets narrowed down to like
the breadwinner model of like postwar
Western societies like it's like a w
earner but that's not all it means it
used to mean going getting meat it used
to mean helping Farm together all
there's all kinds of ways you can be a a
provider service I guess as well just
like yeah it's about being
more there's this great line from CS
Lewis the um a very good Theologian but
obviously much better known for his work
on The Lion the Witch and the Wardrobe
The Chronicles of nania but he this
lovely line and he was talking here
about what it meant to be a Christian
but I think it applies to what it means
to be a mature man as well he said you
shouldn't think less of yourself you
should just think of yourself
less and there's something about service
and pro like just doing for others your
family your community Etc that I think
is quite intrinsic to these ideas of of
mature masculinity and if if men don't
feel as if they are necessary or
encouraged to have a kind of distinct
and important role in the family in the
community then I think that kind of
question mark over well am I needed
anymore is is a real one and lots of
people like Margaret me Anthropologist
in the 70s and a lot of conservatives
were saying look if women do achieve a
significant degree of economic
independence she thought that was a
wonderful thing the conservatives didn't
right but they all agreed that we will
have to think really hard about
men how do we make sure that men still
feel connected and needed in our society
if we have very quickly changed the
central way in which they expressed that
a few things came to mind so it's it's
interesting before I move forward on
this point um when you're talking about
this idea of humans needing to be needed
it made me reflect on some of the stats
that came out around how quickly someone
dies after they retire yeah and that
that kind of General narrative that if
you retire you don't have long left
which is kind of you know this idea of a
social tribe and feeling like you need
to be serving the tribe in some way I've
always wondered if there any truth to
that this idea that you
know retirement can speed up your
mortality because you're yes so almost
like there's something in your body
either one of two things could be
happening number one you just sit around
more which means you know you're more
sedentary yeah exactly this is going to
kill kill you anyway but um number two
is that there's almost I don't know I've
pondered this idea that this is almost
device in our brains that makes us the
tribe and when when it knows knows that
we we might have switched from be
becoming useful to the tribe to becoming
burdensome to the tribe in some way now
that we're consuming resources but
providing none this device in our brain
like turns us off or something yeah
that's we don't we are Surplus to
requirements and so the decent thing to
do is just you know die for the tribe
yeah for the tribe and that we the
theoretically from an evolutionary
standpoint we we we evolved as tribe so
it's not impossible that there's some
you know well I do think that we I mean
of course we didn't used to live
anything like as long this is a stat
that I came across today that this new
book that's just come out which is in
the in
1963 the most common age of death was
one and now it's 83 what whatever right
do you know it's like so the progress
we've made towards greater life
expectancy generally has been huge but
it has then asked these questions about
kind of being needed later on in life so
there's a couple of things I would say
one is that like having a job
is just a massively powerful way of
feeling needed right just showing up
like we we we need you to start to open
up at 6 we need you to like and in fact
Arthur Brooks who used to run the
American Enterprise Institute uh he
tells this wonderful story he was
interviewing this guy uh who'd come out
of prison was in this new program
Rehabilitation Etc and he's chatting to
him and the guy gets a text while he's
chatting to him and he bursts into tears
like gets really tearful and Arthur
says is everything all right did you get
like some bad you know what's happening
is this bad news and he said no no it's
the opposite and he showed the text to
Arthur and the text just said Fred can
you get over here as soon as possible I
really need
you and the guy said to Arthur I've
never heard anyone say that sentence to
me
before I've never had anyone say to me I
need you and in this case it was I need
you to come and I don't even know what
it was right fix this FL
deal with this customer I don't know but
I need you and it brought this guy to
tears because he hadn't kind of felt
that sense of needed before and at its
best the
workplace signals to us on a daily basis
or like yeah you're needed right your
colleagues need you they need each other
that that that's huge and so if you then
don't have
that in the labor market maybe because
you've retired the question is are you
still needed and then I just think we
have to
reinvent the ways in which we can make
use of the skills and wisdom of the
people who suddenly got time you so my
mom she volunteers as a reader in a
primary school because she has time
right and it's amazing she gets to know
the kids really well and she loves it
and so on you know my father he on the
board of a technical thing and he runs
Char they do stuff right they raise
money for all because they got time and
so they're just they're contributing to
the community in a new way and actually
as more and more women
work those Community roles that were
previously very often fulfilled by
moms at home like School volunteering
for example right now they can be done
by perhaps by more by older people and
so part of this story here I think is
also making sure the older people don't
lose that sense too because although we
focus quite rightly on what's Happening
to young men the suicide rates among
older men are also very high uh
especially if they end up on their own
so kind of men on their own later in
life are at massive risk because if you
take my theory about being needed quite
seriously they're just looking around
and saying will anyone even notice if
I'm gone maybe they'll be better off and
so even for those older men we have a
job of work to do to make them feel
really like yeah we need you your church
needs you your scout group needs you
your local charity needs you your
neighbors need you the kid across the
street who needs help with his
university applications needs you the
boy down the road who's like strugg bit
cuz you know his parents have split up
and just want someone to give him a cup
of tea every and talk him they need you
we don't know the boy down the road
anymore or the family next door anymore
and I think so when you you described
that was that was you're describing like
an oldfashioned Way of the World in my
mind because even you even said the word
church I was like well you know where
there's been a rise in atheism and and a
fall in religiosity so yeah that's part
of the problem though and from this
point of view is that we used to have
more institutional structures through
which
our connection to the broader Community
could be you know captured and organized
honestly right so you didn't have to
sort of sit there on your own somewhere
saying how can I contribute to the
community you just volunteered as an
usher or a Bible class or to do the soup
kitchen at your church life came sort of
inherent with responsibility like
because even with church I just grew up
in there in my family I wasn't religious
after the age of 18 but as early as I
knew I was in the church and I was in
Sunday School and I was in St Luke's
hospice on the on the weekends with my
mom and I didn't choose that it was just
it came with life yeah and actually so
the the de
institutionalization of those Community
relationships as we've seen these
institutions weaken has created a real
problem because the needs are still
there but it's like we didn't have the
organizing framework right so whether
it's churches or Community groups or
whatever and and Ms like one of the
things that would happen like my mom was
at home kind of most of the time and
back in the Dark Ages when I was being
raised in the 70s and the 80s um there
were a lot of moms around right and so
they organized a bunch of stuff and they
kind of took care of the community and
they volunteered for stuff and it's
amazing now that women are in the
workplace of course but that sense of
like there were soft institutions like
those networks but also just churches
Community groups Etc they basically
provided a way to kind of plug in my
time and energy to an institution that
then did stuff for other people it's
really hard to do that on your own right
it's really hard to recreate those
institutions online or just on your own
and so I actually think that that's had
a bigger effect on men as well
because historically and even today
women are a little bit better at kind of
maintaining those community and social
networks than men are so absent those
institutional
roles you're going to be a scout leader
you're going to be an usher Church
you're going to volunteer for the school
PTA you're going to you know you're
going to we need men to do this this
this and this right you're going to do
that and you're right some of it wasn't
even question it was just what you
did of course we want more choice but I
do worry about the loss of those
institutional Frameworks if we don't
find ways to replace them and you're
starting to see that now men's sheds
movements and men's groups and and so on
but it's really hard to find secular
online alternatives to those traditional
institutions you mentioned uh an elderly
man who's now alone you know maybe lost
his partner maybe um what did call it
widowed no widower what's the male W I
think widowed is both isn't it oh is it
a widowed man um but as we think about
younger
men and the environment in which the
sort of dating love environment that
they're in what's changed there because
one of the ways that we can feel needed
is if at you know 18 years old we find a
partner and you know she makes me feel
needed my in my life my girlfriend is
one of the people that makes me feel
most needed and most important she's
constantly asking when I'm coming back
from Dragon's Den filming or when I'm
going to be here and she's you know she
makes me feel like I've I'm service to
her in the same way that she service to
me so but but that landscape seems to
have changed as well the dating
environment the Romantic environment
yeah it's interesting again I just
reflecting on my own personal experience
too just through the lives of my sons
and know one of my sons has just spent
ages helping his girlfriend buy her
first car and he's really into cars and
all that stuff and and he's into Finance
with the the loans and he's just
basically done like basically done the
work for her around it cuz he's working
full-time and he's got a bit of time and
so that is a really good example he said
to me the other day he said I said God
you put a load of time into's like test
driven like 20 cars and all of this
stuff loads of this for for your
girlfriend he's like well right now I
don't have that much of my own stuff to
do so it's really nice to be able to do
stuff for her and so you're right I
think those relationships they can be in
like traditional families but also of
course friends but particularly romantic
relationships they can do that for you
so it's not for nothing thing that we're
dating less dating
later um you're seeing a massive rise in
the share of young men who are single by
comparison both to young women and in
the past and and so that's another
change which you could argue is good or
bad right is it good or bad that we're
dating later and having sex later and
taking longer to get married and so on
again I think you can argue for sure
there's lots of good stuff there but one
consequence of that is to leave a lot
more men going a lot
longer before those romantic
relationships were also pulling on them
calling calling on them to say I need
you to do this I need you to drive me to
work can you pick me up from this can
you do to do this right and that used to
happen much much earlier uh than it's
happening now and so there's now
perfectly possibly 25 26 27 years of age
and your parents don't need you because
then you maybe you've left home they
don't need you maybe you don't have a
girlfriend so you don't have a
girlfriend that needs you maybe you're
not working or you're working in a place
you don't really feel like it matters if
you're there or not like so it's
perfectly possible in a way that wasn't
possible until recently to get to your
mid late 20s as a man and honestly feel
like it's not quite clear who needs you
it's interesting because also when you
layer on top of that the dating app
environment um I've had a lot of people
come on the podcast that talk about I
mean I've had a couple of the founders
of the big dating apps but I've also had
have you had the Tinder founder on no
okay I've had people that have left
Tinder and started their own apps like
but one of the things that I've come to
learn is that the bottom sort of 50% of
men are basically getting not much
action at all almost none yeah almost
none and then the like top 10% of men
are getting all the action because the
way that these dating apps are set up is
to really reward that sort of most
affluent most attractive top 10% of men
that are most desirable but I imagine if
you'd gone back a 100 years it was
really like who's in your village versus
you know yeah versus an algorithm
sorting millions of people yes but
that's it's so interesting that pattern
that you describe of like the bottom 50%
of men basically not getting much action
if any and the top 10% like getting
almost all of it because an evolutionary
psychologist that I know looked at that
data and said that looks like human
history to
me so if we go back
further actually 95% of known human
societies were polygamous
right monogamy is very weird and very
recent and here's one that always blows
my mind even though I've said it so many
times now is that we have twice as many
female
ancestors as male
ancestors we have twice as many women in
our ancestral past as me why is that how
does that make sense because and the
reason it's so hard for a modern brain
to get a head around that is because
you're thinking well you need a man and
a woman to have a kid right so you'd
have to have equal numbers yeah but
you're thinking about monogamy across
human history men have only had about a
50% chance of
reproducing so back in each generation
half the male lies just literally die
out like 50% of the men just don't have
kids so boom they're gone and almost all
women have reproduced right so if you
got almost all women reproducing 50% men
then mathematically you're going to end
up twice as many female ancestors
because you don't need that many men
to have babies and so historically
what's happened is the top status men
with the gold and the rich whatever
they've had multiple wives or certainly
concubines or multiple partners there's
like famous examples like genis Khan is
the ancestor whoever but in Ireland
something like more than one in five
Irish people are descended from King
Whatever It Is Well I was told my
grandfather in Nigeria has I'm going to
say 10 wives okay I'm told that I have
40 odd uncles and aunties in Nigeria not
intending to go back anytime soon just
just in case there's a lot of
conversations you're not you're not
tempted by that model I'm not no no I am
actually going to Nigeria soon but uh
but it's it's a headache to think about
navigating that many uncles and aunties
but it's but isn't it interesting how
actually these by going online and sort
of taking away the sort of cultural norm
around kind of monogamy yeah in a way
what it's exposed is kind of this
ancient pattern which is women are much
than
men around partner selection right and
so women are trying to women are sort of
ideally I'll go for him and women are
just going no no no no I didn't know
which way it is that's right which way
it's right yeah so yeah so so the women
are going no no no no oh he's incredibly
handsome and Incredibly rich and right
maybe whatever like maybe whereas the
men are like yeah sure yeah sure she
looks nice maybe not yeah so so you get
this incredible asymmetry between
between the two but in some ways it's
like um I'm making light of it but but
actually could you find a kind of more
telling sign of the fact that so many
men are just kind of feeling like well
maybe a bit useless not very attractive
not very needed not very like just right
the old rules about how to kind of
navigate the Romantic space the old
rules about how to be a man the old
rules about how to succeed a lot of
those have just been turned upside down
creating this huge vacuum
uh which has being filled by all kinds
of bad stuff and and but also just this
massive sense of disorientation it's
like a kaleidoscope you shake it right
but it's still moving we don't know what
the new patterns look like yet and so I
genuinely kind of feel like when I talk
to a lot of the young men and see them
like that is the sense they've got
they're just like whoa like the the
disorientation that they're feeling uh
as we kind of shifted the equilibriums
in some ways the online dating apps are
just magnifying that but there's a can
you IM that's not a great feeling is it
to kind and go on a dating app and not
get any interest at
all I mean you wouldn't know because
you're not on dating app well I'm not on
dating up when you were I'm sure you got
plenty of attention well do you know
what's funny when I was on dating apps I
didn't get much attention really no I
didn't and I've got a very good-looking
best friend and he got all of the
attention so bear in mind I was 18
shoplifting food de feed myself I was
scrawny as how Okay um I was did you put
all that on the I put in my but I tried
to put my best selfie on there and I
just couldn't get any like decent leads
and my best friend who is like blonde
and beautiful and he's got the perfect
hair and he looks like something out of
like a magazine I would sit with him and
he would just get the pick of the litter
so my whole strategy was I would just do
much better in person when I met people
but obviously it's much more difficult
to meet people if you look at the STS
around how people meet it's crazy it's
like a a vertical line upwards um when
you look at the the the line that's
showing people meeting online just out
of nowhere and it went school's gone
down and church has gone down and
through a friend has gone down and it's
pretty much all online so if you're if
you're not I think aesthetically
beautiful in the typical sense of the
word yeah and you know have signals of
wealth and status you really are going
to struggle and I actually know came to
learn this a lot not just from my own
experience on dating app once upon a
time but also from doing this podcast
and I remember the first time we had on
a a founder of a dating app and put the
episode out assuming everyone would love
it and just the anger in the comment
section from pretty much all men who
feel like dating apps have ruined their
lives or are just just an evil thing in
the world and it really caught me off
guard in fact reading those comments on
that particular episode was when I go oh
my God people hate dating apps there's
like this group of people that just
think it's like the the cause of all
pain um
this is really difficult stuff to talk
about I think because it's so it's so
visceral it's Primal right we're talking
about sex we're talking about
procreation we're talking about our DNA
being passed onh and who with and so
it's not for nothing if if something's
happening in that in that market and
it's not for nothing we see a huge rise
in the share of childless men like
especially getting to 40 and and of
women but more even more so for men and
more men saying having children is
important to them more men starting to
say actually forming a family is kind of
important to them and so there's a
there's a weird Paradox here which is
that you know the old idea of like
marriage and kids is that like women
have to kind of trap men into it right
you know as men we just want to go our
own way right we want Cowboys around in
the desert or the forest or something
but the ball and chain the woman she
traps you right and she domesticates you
and you kind of go along with it because
you to have kids but but in your heart
in your heart you're still out there on
the Frontier right and she's the one at
the half that is complete [__] on
every single level actually historically
back to where were before being
masculine meant being in the tribe it
meant generating more than you need for
yourself I love this idea of a surplus
that comes from this guy David Gilmore
that mature men generate more of
whatever it is than they need they're
Surplus generators so rather than being
Surplus to requirements which is what I
think a lot of men feel they actually
generate a surplus for others to use and
so the idea of like you heard this men
going their own way movement it's like a
male separatist thing online we're going
to go our own way we don't need know
turning away from
women is the opposite of masculinity
right masculinity defined as like a A
Lone Ranger or a I'm My Own man is the
least masculine sentence I think you
could ever utter I'm just my own man I
do my own thing right if you're not a
man for others and in my view you're not
you're not a man and so it's quite
interesting to kind of think about how
the current world of like dating and
families and so on if it does leave many
men feeling like they're not going to
have those connections and not going to
have a sense of being for others and not
just not providing just in the economic
sense but being needed then it does
leave a lot of them benched and they
either go their own way or they get mad
as hell so you see the rise of the
incell movement
Etc um and so again you're just seeing
these extreme the extreme examples are
the ones that get the headlines but
behind that behind the kind of men who
are acting out there's a lot more men
who are checking out they're just saying
I think I'm done with this and that's
very
dangerous marriage has also had a a
knock on effect to this hasn't it
because this the sort of the role of
marriage in society has changed but also
the stats around marriage seem to be
changing what what information do you
have on that am I right in thinking that
marriage is in Decline a little bit bit
Yeah marriage has gone down this is one
area where it's very different in
different countries so I have to be
careful about this like in the US
there's a big class Gap in marriage like
college educated Americans are still
getting married non-oled UC Americans
are
not but in most of Western Europe you've
seen a big rise in the share of kids
being born outside marriage now the
question then was like what job if
anything was being done by marriage and
if marriage was a way to sort of signal
and
enshrine a commitment to having kids
together raising those kids together
then in a sense like there all kinds of
only you have a civil partnership now or
there are legal documents you can have
that kind of do that and so
if it gets if the de if the decline of
marriage is related to a decline in
fathering that's a
problem it doesn't have to mean that
because a you can be a perfectly good
father if you're living with your
partner and you're not married but also
you can be a good father if for whatever
reason the relationship with the mother
doesn't work out it's harder uh you're
going to have to kind of work at it a
bit more but you can still do it but
because of this old idea of like
fathering being bundled together with
marriage right I think that's my big
problem is it was like it was like a
One-Stop thing right it's like husband
and father was kind of like one thing
but that's not true anymore so it's okay
if that's not true so long as we don't
lose the fathering bit because dads
matter for their kids as much as their
moms in different ways and at different
times on average but so I my worry about
the changes in family are not about
marriage per se they're about what that
might mean for fatherhood and and what
lot of conservative critics will say is
well the evidence is that actually the
men who marry are more engaged fathers
and do stick around for longer but of
course the problem with that that's one
of the reasons they got married yeah of
course yeah right so it's very hard to
tease out cause and effect there and in
the end I'm sort of agnostic about the
marriage question but I'm not agnostic
about the fathering question like I
don't think you have a moral
responsibility to get married before you
have kids at all I do think that if you
have kids you have a moral
responsibility to be a father to those
kids that is a that is just that's an
inextinguishable moral responsibility
and that gets a little bit lost because
sometimes on the the Fe the feminists
left to just characterize horribly say
do we need do we need dads anymore isn't
that a bit heteronormative I've
sometimes been accused of being
heteronormative for being proad you what
about samesex couples what about single
parents are we saying that they need
their dads right isn't that that feels a
bit oldfashioned a bit conservative to
get that on the other side and then and
other side yeah of course dad's matter
that's why they all have to get that's
why they should be married and of course
the truth is between the two the truth
is that dad's matter will stop whether
they're married to the mother or not um
and both the people who insist the only
way to do that is through marriage are
wrong and the people who insist that
dads don't matter are equally wrong and
about 40% of births in the US now take
place outside of marriage which is up
from about 10% 19up in us that's crazy
that's I that's just why is that is that
it's us is really weird because it has
really high rates of like unmar married
um pregnancies and births but then like
really high rates of marriage among the
kind of college educated at the top so
as I said this huge class Gap there's a
race element here so 70% of black kids
in the US are born outside marriage
there's also a huge education Gap here
as I just alluded to is a big big class
Gap so most kids to non- colge educated
parents are born outside marriage in the
US now and so it's weird what's happened
is that the average marriage rate in the
US is really disguising these huge
differences by race and class whereas in
most western European countries there
aren't such big differences by RCI or
class it's more of a just more of a
general decline it hasn't declined
particularly more for one class than
another in in the UK so quite common in
the UK for couples to decide to have
kids together have kids together and not
get married and that's definitely true
in Scandinavia and Northern Europe as
well and who is marriage good for who is
it serving more men or women now
men CU I I was thinking if we pressed a
button and the marriage stats went
backwards in time I more people got
married and they got married within um
when they they gave birth within
marriages would that be better for men
or women it' be better for men why
because uh marriage being with the kids
and kind of with the the mom is just
right now still an incredibly important
way for men to feel needed connected
involved Etc now that might change but
right now it is pretty clear that
they'll do better and like if you look
at the impact of being being married and
not married on
employment
earnings
health physical and mental health life
expectancy huge positive impacts for men
much less so for women so it's like
women and of course if you go back if we
went the other way like you'd say well
actually women who weren't married were
in real trouble economically until
recently right
so my line from before was that like
women used to be economic dependent on
men but men were emotionally dependent
on
women and I think we've really done a
lot on the first half of that and it's
kind of revealing the second part the
kind of the fact that actually wifeless
men partnerless men childless men they
don't do so well in fact they do
terribly so I've mentioned this
four-fold suicide difference in Risk
it's eight an eight-fold difference
among divorced men and women so men who
get divorced their risk of of suicide
skyrockets so the question is like why
and I think it is because of this sense
of like not being needed not being like
if your kids are at home and your wife's
at home and you know you're just you're
contributing to the family unit I think
that's much more obvious and it's really
interesting in recent surveys in the US
at least men are now more likely than
women to say that it's important to them
to get
married so what does that say about
what's going on in men's heads if
they're now more keen on marriage than
women what are what's it because that's
to me sounded a little bit I know
territorial well there's a danger with
that and of course you can you can get
into real trouble as one of your
previous guests did by talking about
enforced monogamy who who talked Jordan
Peterson oh did he okay yeah he talked
about enforced monogamy it's a very
unfortunate term it's actually a term
from
anthropology that basically was a way of
describing this new way of raising
families there only been around for a
few centuries where you just where men
and women either by law or by social
Norm are only required to marry one
person they're required well you can't
bigam is a crime what's bigamy uh being
married to more than one person okay
right it's a crime in the US it's a
crime in the UK it's a crime in most in
most countries it's actually against the
law to have more than one spouse imagine
how how how a liberal is that the state
telling me how many wives I'm allowed or
how many husbands I thought when you
said required I thought you meant you
have to marry one that's what people
thought it meant and that's why you got
into such terrible trouble um but it
actually what it's referring to as a
social system which is which is
basically against polygamy it's
basically saying no no no no one gets
forced into marriage what it is is
saying if you going to marry it can only
be monogamous right okay so the the
trouble is that people the trouble is
people heard it as we're going to force
you into marriage and into monogamy and
actually what the term means is we're
not going to allow you to be polygamous
okay right so it's it kind of it was
sort of misinterpreted um the term was
misinterpreted um but it does speak to
this fear I think that people will feel
forced economically or socially in into
it it's actually has not for nothing
that Andrew Tate I'm sure you know
Andrew Tate and his work I know who he
is yeah right I don't know him I've
never spoken to him right but I'm you
know who I'm referring to right why did
he convert to
Islam people aren't talking about this
by the way this is not a polite topic of
conversation Andrew Tate's conversion
for understandable reasons people don't
want to be seen to be St islamophobia or
whatever but but I will tell you this
and we published a piece by an Imam us
Andre Tate has a huge following among
young Muslim men in the US and the UK
and he's now
converted to Islam
publicly and the reason he's done that
is so he can have multiple
wives which is to be fair to him
entirely consistent with his world view
about gender and gender equality and the
role of men and women right and so it's
interesting to kind of think about the
role and there's this rise of polyamory
now and and so on actually thinking
about monogamy polygamy Etc it's it's a
much more complicated story I think than
many people are are willing to admit
because it's not clear that if we just
kind of take away the sort of social
norms around like the one andone model
that that will necessarily be better for
men so when you say of course men are in
favor of polygamy of course you'd be in
favor of it like who wouldn't want three
wives
shouldn't speak for you no I'm trying to
I'm trying to satisfy one at the moment
right but actually as some people point
out you know actually if you're a woman
is it clear that you'd rather be the
only wife of an unemployed steel worker
than the second wife of an incredibly
successful
podcaster maybe maybe for all women
that's a clear choice right but but the
kind of points simply being is we
shouldn't just assume that this is kind
of a male you know only for kind of men
idea um anyway it's a digression into an
area that I'm far from expert in but
it's prompted by this whole idea about
dating marriage and commitment and so
where I would land on this is that even
as we reform
marriage family life the roles of men
and women we have to be really careful
to keep GR rounding men in a sense of
being needed by their kids especially
and by their communities if so if not in
the traditional way through a kind of
you know a recently traditional marriage
as the bread winner and provider and all
that the one my father had and Al lots
of other things besides swimming coach
math tutor chauffeur all the ways he
provided for us and as a father if we're
going to replace that with a new model
we have to be really careful to make
sure that we do replace it and that we
don't actually make men feel like they
are not needed in this new world are
women asking for divorce you know you're
talking about that you know idea of
polygamy and women and men are women
asking for divorce now more so than men
are yes women are more likely to
precipitate divorce than
men and again does about two about two
to one I think wow certainly certainly
much in the US it's much higher among
women yeah I mean that's an indication
of something it's an indication
of a healthy Freedom yeah exit power
yeah exit power yeah I mean that's what
an economist would call it right and
that that's that shows you that's a
massive sign of success that women can
leave relationships in a way that they
couldn't before because they were
trapped economically and so this kind of
economic trap that was marriage which
the women's movement really kind of
really took aim at and just said this
institution of marriage is basically a
way to trap and oppress women in
relationships of economic dependency
which you'll be powerless because he has
the money right that feminist critique
of traditional marriage was profound and
correct and the results have been
extraordinary in unbundling that and
giving women economic power because
without economic power women don't have
choice about marriage so now we've got
this massive rise in women's Choice as
to whether to marry who to marry whether
to have kids who to have kids with Etc
and so you see this massive expansion of
women's choice and power which is
magnificent and destabilizing especially
for men both of those things can be true
at once yeah it can be creating these
unintended destabilizing consequences
for men and if we then add to that a
danger sometimes to either mock men or
masculinity almost pathologize them in
humor but sometimes maybe not so much in
humor as well I think that just doubles
down on this sense it's like not only
are you not needed but maybe you're
actually a bit toxic uh and so I think
there's of all the moments to not be
really kind of making sure that men feel
really bad about themselves this is not
that moment right what do you think of
that phrase toxic masculinity I think
it's
toxic I think the term toxic masculinity
is toxic I didn't always think that it's
taking me a while to get to that but I
would now say it's basically a slur it's
a gender slur if you like and it's just
used too easily too loosely too casually
to describe male behavior that we don't
like and I I would say actually most
thoughtful kind of women's groups and
feminists are not supporting it now um
because it just it it's not a great
recruiting tool by and large right one
one big problem with it is if you ask
people who use the term toxic
masculinity to Define non-toxic
masculinity they struggle they'll say oh
no no there are positive aspects of
masculinity so okay great great what are
they and they'll say nurturing and
caring and kind kindness and emotional
availability and you go and is that
different from femininity say no no it's
the
same okay so let me get this straight
masculinity is either toxic or not
masculine because if they start
saying
courage positive risk-taking you know
well channeled
competitiveness do you say what are you
saying women aren't
courageous uh no no I'm not saying that
okay so sorry what what do you so it's
an empty so non-toxic masculinity is
basically an empty set so they can't
fill that category so youve either got
toxic or or nothing that's bad but also
just think on a visceral level it
reminds me and you have a church
background so the phrase toxic
masculinity really reminds me of the
term original
sin yeah it's something in you that's
kind of you didn't have any choice about
it like you inherited it um from
previous generations and it's kind of
bad and we can't get rid of it
uh so there s you're born with this flaw
you got to repent at all opportunities
for your yeah and it feels like that to
me it's like just and maybe this is the
third point I don't know but it's like
honestly is the the best we can offer to
young men is a prospectus that we could
make them not toxic how would you like
to be non-toxic isn't that an exciting
idea that's the worst recruiting slogan
ever and so it's driving young men away
it's an incredibly unhelpful term it's
unfairly applied it used to have some
value in Academia like before 2016 it
had this very technical term in Academia
but I think as a term now it really just
does send this incredibly unfortunate
message to men which doesn't encourage a
debate about how to be a better man I I
much prefer immature and mature
masculinity I like the idea of saying
like what does mature masculinity look
like because you know what immature
masculinity looks like right and so I
think this kind of maturation is a much
better way to frame it than toxic
non-toxic is there such a thing as and
I've never asked this question before
but it just came to mind is there such a
thing as toxic
femininity have you watched Mean
Girls uh I can't say I've watched it but
I know the movie and I've seen trailers
and stuff there's a new Tina uh movie I
think right okay uh an update of it but
um yeah and interest I think this
relates to the debate about social media
and the way that social media is so
particularly damaging to the mental
health of teen girls and young women
because it's very relational and so the
relational bullying that girls and young
women are more likely to engage in than
men are so men are more likely
historically much less so today but to
have bullied physically yeah women are
much more likely to bully relationally
so they exclude you you're not my best
friend anymore you're not invited you're
Etc and they bully by using you know how
you look but so that relational bullying
gets kind of Amplified by um social
media and so if you were to try and
Define toxic femininity I suspect that's
where you would go and it would be
around ostracism and meanness if you
think the mean girl's phenomenon is
getting at something real which is the
ability of kind of women to be pretty
brutal to each other it's probably
something more around that but I I just
think putting the word toxic before
either femininity or masculinity is just
a bad move I think it's a bad move
intellectually and I think it's a
terrible move
culturally on this subject of um
masculinity one of the sort of defining
traits of masculinity in society is that
men don't speak they don't open up and
um they're less likely to I think they
struggle more to to form friendships
I've certainly found that to be the case
in my life if if you drop me and my
partner in London as actually has
happened and she she wasn't from here
she's never lived here before it only
took her a couple of months before she's
got a group she's going to these like
dance this class and I'm away doing
Dragons day next week so she's found a
group of Portuguese girls and she's
gonna go watch the match and I could
never I don't know how the hell she's
made friends I I've made zero new
friends in London in five years MH my
friends are my colleagues and my friends
that I've had for 10 years that is it I
don't make new friends um and and this
is something that I have echoed to me a
lot when I meet men out and about when I
could do talks and stuff and they come
up to me after I've had men whisper to
me how do how do I make friends where
I'm lonely and when they do it they come
really really close so that the person
behind them in the queue can't hear them
say it I exactly the same experience and
they whisper it about how do I make
friends or I'm feeling lonely or
something like that and I've heard in
your work the work that was in your book
I think on page 45 you say that there is
a male friendship recession what did you
mean when you said that that we're
seeing a decline in in friendships
generally but it's much more acute for
men so in the US 15% of men under the
age of 30 say they don't have a single
close friend that's up from 3% in
1990 and so that's almost one in seven
men um you're seeing declining number of
men saying how much time they spend with
friends uh drinking social networks
everything You' just described which is
like the process of making and
sustaining friends is just something
that men are really struggling with
right
now much more so than women and I think
there's a couple of things going on here
one is we're revealing the extent to
which a lot of that work was actually
outsourced to women before right so if
you're in a couple how often are the
social arrangements made by the women um
they do a lot of the that mainten the
relationship maintenance and the men
free ride on the women right every like
weekend plan that's outside of my
comfort zone pretty much most of them
come from my partner all right she's
organized something she's an organizer
she wants to go try this thing right and
you're like let's go do vegan sushi roll
I just want to play Far Cry five I just
want to lie on my back and watch
Manchester United all right fine sorry I
chose the wrong I chose the wrong thing
yeah I know um so I think like and women
have been better at it and Men haven't
had to do as much of it so in some ways
like I think we're being exposed a bit
more in a sense that like women aren't
doing as much of that work for us
anymore they're saying look I'm like
it's not my job to create your
friendship Network for you so we're
having to do it and we're not very good
at it and we're certain not very good at
it yet and I've had the same experience
I mean I wrote a bit I wrote a bit about
loneliness and I spoke at an event not
that long afterwards and I had a couple
of young men exactly the same as you
just come clo and just say I'm
incredibly
lonely and thank you for talking about
this and you end up hugging them and
like and actually for
me I was talking to some about this the
other day there's something about
loneliness that just breaks my heart in
a way that other forms of suffering
don't and I don't know why but if I hear
about someone that's really
lonely it just my mom was talking about
this guy that who she ran into him and
he was going to this supermarket and you
know he was in front of her in the queue
and she's like no after you he's like no
no no you go first and he said I'm on my
own and actually the hours after dinner
especially in the summer they're the
hardest so I always come down here to
the supermarket and I buy a couple of
things and then come back and have a
chat and you know it fills my time and
my mom because she's like a massive like
she's like a social worker to the world
she ends up chatting to him and get
taking his phone number um but actually
that
just pierced my heart it just and so
when you hear about these men young old
women as like who are lonely I think
it's huge and and so I and and back to
our earlier bit of the conversation too
is like those institutions that maybe
used to kind of connect you to other
people right where do you where do you
make friends and you just said at work
right and so I think our colleagues in
some ways become our friends and that's
not necessarily a bad thing saying it is
a bad thing but but it's it's different
to the Friends you've made at church or
through your sports or through do you
know what I mean or wherever and and so
the other thing I'll say about this is
have you heard of the men's sheds
movement I don't know what a men's sheds
is but I've heard of male groups and
stuff emerging yes there male groups
emerging there's one which is the
Australian government just funded this
in Australia it's called the men men's
sheds and there places where men go and
fix stuff mhm like you'll bring a
lawnmower I do stuff right um and it's
one of the things that I found I've
really learned from this I wish I'd
known more about it before it's like
have you heard of this thing about men
communicating more easily shoulder toh
shoulder than face to face have you come
across this yeah I've heard about this
it's really interesting so when my uh my
wife would sometimes when my boys came
home from school she'd sit down directly
opposite them like across the breakfast
bar type thing right and she'd sit
directly opposite and give them protein
and then she'd be like how's your day
yeah like she like this right and then
later on we'd be driving somewhere or
watching soccer or playing a video game
like shoulder toh shoulder and they'd be
like yeah it's weird thing happened
today with her or with me right So
eventually I said you've got to stop
staring them in their face that's not
how that's not how men open up right and
so the men's sheds movement is actually
I think based on a profound Insight
which which is that men have to be doing
something in order to be being with
their friend go into any coffee shop and
count how many people are sitting there
staring at each other for hours on end
mostly women not saying right and then
go to fishing road trips it's the only
explanation for golf do you play golf no
thank god um but like like when a guy is
saying do you think I should use the
five iron yeah I don't play golf either
right but what he's really saying is I
love you yeah or I'm lonely or need help
and so there is something to be said for
like men and even super have studied
actually how men stand in relation to
each other like a party or something
when I've told you this you won't be
able to stop looking is that men
actually always a bit of an angle right
we just don't stand face to face it's it
spikes our threat cortisol or whatever
so we always stand a little bit of an
angle um but also like doing something
together um requires us to be more
shoulder-to-shoulder which is why some
psychotherapists now they do walking
talking therapy they realized that with
men especially like sitting them down
and staring at them is less effective
quite often than going for a walk you've
done therapy haven't you yeah how was
it I've done therapy and I've done
coup's therapy and um I actually I will
say that I did much better with the male
therapist and one of them we did
walk um and so I'm basing some some kind
of personal experience which is like
there's something about sitting on a
chair or kind of and being stared at and
told to open up I've been there do you
find it hard to do that yes I do I find
it really really hard when I did Coupes
therapy and I've done um individual
therapy I found it really hard I find it
even harder in couple couple
therapy it's one of the reasons
I'm really worried about the declining
share of men in Psychology and therapy I
mean you know we emptying the men out of
those professions really yeah yeah the
share of men going into psychology and
counseling has plummeted in the US and
the UK so there are fewer and fewer men
it's getting harder and harder to find a
male therapist now maybe that doesn't
matter but I absolutely think it matters
and again we basic like you just shared
your experience I'll share mine is that
I think to have the option and when you
know one of my kids really needed
therapy too I think for him he did so
much better with a man and I I think
there's some depending on the nature of
the problem maybe you're St it's just
something about like an intuitive
connection if you're a B2B marketeer
then you want to stick around for the
next 30 seconds or say as a businesso
business marketeer you all know how
tough it is to explain what you do I've
been there too but there's a platform
that gets us and that's LinkedIn I'm
happy to say sponsor this podcast
imagine a place where you can connect
with professionals who truly understand
your world that is LinkedIn ads LinkedIn
ads helps you to build a meaningful
relationships and drive results in a
respectful environment with over a
billion members including 130 million
senior level Executives and 10 million C
Level Executives you can Target your
audience precisely by job title industry
and much more LinkedIn members are
always updating their profiles so your
targeting stays fresh and relevant it's
no surprise that LinkedIn is the highest
returning paid social platform and
Linkedin ads have kindly offered all of
you a $100 credit to launch your first
campaign and start reaching the right
people go to linkedin.com
doac 24 to claim your credit terms and
conditions
apply I think I heard you say that going
to couples's counseling with your
partner was one of the most difficult
things you've ever
done
yes this is a quote the hardest thing
you've ever done as a man is when him
and your wife went to couples therapy
you said that on Scott Galloway's
podcast yes
why so my wife and I were working
through actually a lot of these issues
that we've been talking about today like
what our relative roles were and
responsibilities and and she's been very
successful professionally and we've
raised our kids together I've been a
stay-at-home dad and and then worked and
so on and there was this moment
where it was really one of those pivotal
moments in your life where I was talking
about what I done at home and how i'
supported her career and you know all of
that and she looked at me and
said you seem to think the the problem
is that you're not feminist
enough the problem is that you're not
masculine
enough like that's a moment that's a
real moment that was a it
was and we then started talking what did
she mean by that and it was about
responsibility it was about stepping in
in some ways to some of those roles and
and what I came to realize and this is
in some ways the book The the book
underneath that book which is my own
journey and my own struggles with my own
sense of what does it mean to be a man
what does masculinity mean in a
relationship and a society of
profound moral equality between men and
women
and I realized that in some ways i' I'd
been sort of almost at War with my own
masculinity for quite a long time
because it didn't fit my feminist
mindset right like to the extent that
there were things that I kind of wanted
or felt that didn't fit with the kind of
model of gender equality and feminism
that's that was a problem to be solved
rather than a way of being to be
expressed and learned about and it took
that moment of my incredibly feminist
unbelievably professionally successful
wife to say I think the problem is
you're not masculine enough and it was
just like the energy that I had and
like I felt as if like asking for more
in our relationship for myself was to be
a bad feminist was to not support her I
was supposed to be a good
Ally you know the world is made for men
and all our needs and desires and so on
so my job was to to be an ally to her
and anything that got in the way of that
or that was difficult or complicated and
it was well I I don't know what would
have happened to our relationship
without it but I can tell you that from
that moment onwards our relationship
grew and flourish and continues to flow
in a way that it just would not
otherwise have done because it's almost
like VI being so
direct she forced this movement inside
me where I almost gave myself
permission to give some expression to
the sides of myself that are more
masculine I mean that's not the
conversation people hear
publicly you're not putting this out are
you I thought it was just us but I mean
people don't people don't there's so
much truth to that and I think there's
so many women that are listening right
now that are nodding their head and can
relate in various ways because of the
way that Society is to some degree now
um but that's not the narrative we hear
that a woman would turn to you and and
ask you to be more masculine in the
context of sort of the typical idea of
what masculinity means it at least what
it means to her yeah almost the opposite
it would be with the toxic back to your
point about it is masculinity the
problem which I thought it was and it
took her to point out that no no no it's
how it's expressed that's the question
and and for me it was like I just
I thought that being assertive in the
relationship was
somehow bad because it was associated
with kind of you know patriarchy
masculinity and like men dominating and
like and it's really interesting like
I'll bring it down to like a more benign
level I think a lot of young women
actually one of the things they feel
about a lot of young men is that they're
a bit
passive it's almost like a lot of those
men almost don't feel they have
permission to be assertive and what
women like it's it's fun for you and I
to talk about what women want isn't it
but I think there something what a lot
of the women I talk to say is like I
just want someone who's my equal and
that's so weird to say now right but
they they want someone that's a partner
that's with them and and they say well
what know what should we do tonight or
you know where should we go for dinner
and if he says I don't know you decide I
don't mind right it's always just like
well no you decide and you make a plan
and you you you know you book it you
like show some agency here and I might
not always agree with you or even like
it we can get get into that right but
just going passive is not what makes you
a good partner or a good feminist and I
and I I think my maybe my gener I'm
older than you maybe my generation of
men have really struggled more with that
just because I think it was kind there
was this kind of strong sense that we
that we needed to sort of yeah
just in order for women to become bigger
we had to make ourselves smaller
and I think that was a profound
intellectual and for me emotional and
relational error the point is we all
need to get bigger we all want to rise
and grow and challenge each other and
challenge each other to grow
not silence ourselves or bench
ourselves following going through that
process with your partner how did you
change I became much more willing so one
of my issues is I'm quite agreeable
right so I don't like I avoid conflict
quite a
bit um but I also saw like provoking
conflict and disagreeing and arguing as
like bad for the relationship and also
like me doing it as a man like bad for
her and and so I actually became much
more willing to say no I don't want to
do that I want to do this or I want to
go there not there or I'd like to do
this not that um and and it caused more
arguments which was uncomfortable for me
but it was great and it was what she
wanted there were two aspects to it if
I'm honest like one was like stand up a
little bit more for myself and a little
bit like in the relationship and be like
no I like I disagree about that I'm
going to do this and just give her more
of a equal in that sense of challenge
but the other thing was really an issue
was just actually just the kind of
responsibility responsibility around
kind of economics and so on too and I
don't think this was just about gender
but it took me a while I think to really
get a proper sense of like just being a
a provider a coach
provider wasn't bad right making
money in a way that would help our
family and give us more choices wasn't
bad and so there was there was that kind
of sense too as like because she' at
that up until that point she'd actually
done more the breadwinning MH uh and so
there's a kind of sense of her saying
look I'm I'm about as feminist as you
get but you know what wouldn't mind it
if we could do a bit of this you can do
a bit more of that as well I read some
study the other day and I'll I'll triple
check this and put it on screen but I
think the study if I'm going to get this
correct said that about 70% of women
want to be with a guy that's earning
more than them something like that it
was like 70 80% or something like that
that's about right I mean you can check
it but it depends which server you can
choose a Ser yeah like but you know what
it's so interesting that's I've been
thinking about that quite a bit recently
that reliably in surveys women will say
like I want a guy that can that has
earning potential earns more can earn
more but what you have to be really
careful I think how the questions asked
and what the interpretation of it
is um I think
actually what it's very often about is
women wanting and a lot of young women
have said suggested this to me not just
young women but but even women of my
generation that what they really want is
a
partner and earning is a really good
proxy for someone who's got their act
together right someone who's a good
earner yeah is also gonna be a good
father probably and a good partner and
so on too so it's actually just a really
good signal right the market the labor
market is a very good signal of all
kinds of other skills and so on um so
that's number one I think they actually
just getting someone who like is he's
got his act together right he's he's
he's he's good thing he's got skills
he's got you know he's got agency he's
like and those are good in all kinds of
other circumstances too so when I was a
stay-at home Dad I like to think I had a
lot of agency and I didn't like lie on
the sofa all day like I did stuff and
organized stuff so I think it's partly
that but I also think it's partly
because a lot of women want
choice they want options to maybe take
some time themselves to be at home and
that's a really interesting modern
development right is I think the
feminist call now from a lot of wom to
men is like I don't know if I'm going to
want to take time out to kind of raise
the kids but I'd like the option yeah
right and that's only an option if
you're doing your bit if you're earning
right and so I do know some women who
like very successful professionally and
then they have kids and their partner is
much much less successful like I know
one couple where he was he was literally
a kind of mus failing musician as she
was like this partner in some Law Firm
or whatever it's it was like a it was
like a movie it's so stereotypical but
and she like she has kids and she's like
well I'd like to have a bit of time Ain
going to live on his you know solo
guitar YouTube salary or whatever it was
right and at that point she's mad at him
maybe a little bit too late you because
like I just i' just like you to
give me the option H and of course we
won it both ways now right like it was
great for me to be able to have time at
home while my uh my partner was able to
just go for it professionally for a
while just totally go for it that was
beautiful for both of us but we
shouldn't make the mistake of thinking
that it shouldn't go both ways like we
can't we can't we got to couldn't get
rid of the provider model we got to
think about ourselves as copr providers
of a whole bunch of things money time
love energy and not take ourselves out
the equation at all that's not
that's not that's not what the women's
movement was about the women's movement
was about women securing economic
independence not about men losing it
that's not attractive you've got two
sons right three three sons okay so I
guess this kind of brings us to the
penultimate point which is you if you
were sitting down with all three of your
sons which you might have done already
and they said to you Dad listen what
does it mean to be a man in the modern
world what should I do should I hold the
door open should I I don't know uh go to
the gym should I pursue a highflying
breadwinning job what does it mean to be
a man what advice would you give them
about being a man in the modern world
honestly the advice that would set them
up to be successful in their romantic
relationships and in the world and in
their
mind yeah what it's interesting because
in some ways I think the fact that
conversation might almost be a sign of
failure not just individually more
socially because I really believe that
people believe their eyes before they
believe their ears and so what I would
really hope is that I've been showing
not
telling um that it's not a curriculum
it's not a here are the here's the
four-point plan for modern masculinity
based on my years of research it's more
like well you've seen how I am you've
seen how I am with your mom you've seen
how I've worked you've seen how I've
raised you you've seen like how you've
seen you've seen how I interact with
people in there's this lovely phrase
from a philosopher is in the thick of
daily life like how are you in the thick
of daily life you've seen me help that
person you've seen me like they tease me
with this I pick up the lime scooters
all the time right because someone's
going to trip over them right You'
you've you've seen how I've reacted like
and I haven't done that kind of saying
oh this is masculinity but you've seen
me do certain things that you've just
kind of imbued along the way so that
sounds like a cop out but I won't cop
out completely because I think I would
say look first of all recognize that
there are on average differences right
so there are going to be things that
you're going to be inclined towards or
want to do that just different right
there's nothing wrong with masculinity
nothing wrong with some of these
impulses and instincts that you've got
right of course you want complete gender
equality and so you're going to look for
partners who are going to give you that
as well and above all be for others
serve and so the first two i' open the
door for sure yeah what was the second
one I can't remember but you said open
the door
um it's about career and it's about
going to the gym go to the gym sure I
mean actually all the evidence about
being physically healthy is is important
um but then kind of get a highing job I
wouldn't say that uh I would say find
work that yes will pay don't be naive
about that but it's much more important
you're passionate about your work you'll
be much more attractive to someone if
you're passionate we only we're only
here once for God's sake and so the idea
that you're going to you know that
someone's attracted someone who like
kind of into their work just because it
makes a bunch back to
our that's not
sexy doesn't matter what the paycheck is
right what sexy is passion and agency
and you know Verve Mojo whatever so
absolutely I I would uh I would advise
uh all of that I actually think it's
kind of weird back to the dating thing
is
that in some I think it captures a lot
of our conversation though which is that
I I've tried to raise them in a way that
would give them the courage to ask a
girl
out the grace to accept no for just
accept no for an
answer and then the responsibility to
make sure that either way she gets home
safely so what I've got in there is a
little bit of agency a little bit of
leaning in a little bit of taking a risk
it's a risk to ask someone out right and
I think risk taking is is on average a
bit more mascul that's secondly you have
no sense of entitlement about that and
if you've read it wrong or whatever and
she's like no thank you like you are
totally cool with that right incredibly
but then thirdly either way right there
is a responsibility to make sure people
are kind of safe and if you're in a
position where you're a little bit
stronger and able to do that great in
fact I had a rule with my kids that they
they had a curfew but actually they
broke the curfew because they were
getting someone home safely they got an
exemption from that and there was one
night one of my sons came home and he
was I was waiting for him and he was 30
minutes after curfew pouring with rain
he came home drowned rat and he'd walked
to girl home got home safely like great
now I like to think that sort of
formulation is capturing some stuff that
is a bit more inherently masculine but
in a world where there's no entitlement
there's no sense of inequality and I
don't think that's a horrible formula
and generally speaking I've kind of
found a lot of men kind of men and women
like Yes actually actually I would quite
like you I'm as a covered garage or what
I would actually quite like to kind of
make you make sure that I get to my car
safely or kind of whatever and I don't
think that's
patriarchy I think that's good manners
and responsibility what that doesn't
mean is that and you do it for your boss
you do it for somebody else it doesn't
mean that there's any going back to a
world where that gave you some sort of
extra power in the labor market or
something like that so I think it's
really difficult honestly right now to
get this right I think but I think too
many people also treading on eggshells a
little bit too yeah like they do rather
than run the risk of doing something
wrong they do
nothing and that's the worst of all
worlds because we don't learn but also
those kids are going to fall into their
hands of others in terms of their
influence so they're going to learn how
to be a man from Tik Tok or Twitter and
you never know which algorithm is going
to sweep them away one thing we can be
pretty sure of is that with some
exceptions you're not going to learn how
to be a man from social media or online
you're going to learn it from your dad
your neighbor your brother your teacher
your coach the the the best antidote to
some of the reactionary content that
some young men are encountering online
now isn't other online content much
though of course we're all producing
more online content it's actually a real
live man in your life it's flesh and
blood it's I and I think that's so much
more powerful I think that my son as a
teacher in front of a classroom of boys
is going to be a much more powerful
antidote to those reactionary figures
that they might see online than somebody
else online that's how we win we win in
real life not online I mean there's kind
of two adjacent points here the first is
your your son is going into a profession
that is incre increasingly depleting in
men yeah because I what's it like 20% or
30% of primary school teachers are women
uh men uh no it's primary it's one in 10
one in 10 in primary yeah okay so those
those role models are lacking in primary
education but then he's going into SEC
is it high school Secondary School uh
he's going to be teaching Elementary to
start with yeah the primary school yeah
so those role models are really needed
there and the adjacent point was you've
talked to me about what you'd say to
your sons around the kitchen table but
but if I elect you as president of the
world or at least the Western World you
in us let's say um and North America and
I tell you that you've got to solve the
issues you talk about in this book of
boys and men why the modern male is
struggling why it matters and what to do
about it fact you had to solve the
issues you describe so eloquently what
would you do at a social level to fix
things the suicidality the mental health
issues we're seeing the loneliness we're
seeing the educational Gap we're seeing
if you're in a position where you have a
a voice you're in a position where
Authority president prime minister or
anybody actually I think it's very easy
to understate the power of Simply
acknowledging a problem and having
empathy for the people who are
struggling from it and so whilst I could
list a whole bunch of policy Solutions
which I think would be part of the inter
you you'd have to say and that's why I'm
doing X that's why I'm having a men's
health strategy and we're hiring male
teachers and we're you know we're having
a we're funding Mental Health Services
for men Etc I would do all that but I
actually think that the most important
move would be to send a signal
especially to young men and boys who are
struggling I see you we see you we hear
you we've got you we understand that
you're struggling we are not going back
on the move for women and girls but we
are taking your problems
seriously and we're continuing to take
the problems of women and girls
seriously simp L making them feel seen
and heard and empathized with is a
massive thing it's a massive because so
many of them right now feel as if their
problems aren't being discussed aren't
being addressed at that level they are
being addressed online over here by many
reactionary figures but they're not
being addressed by the people in
positions of power very often they're
being dismissed sometimes and the result
of that is to create this really
dangerous vacuum in our society also in
men's lives like if there are real
problems and we neglect them and they
don't feel they they can become
Grievances and that's a Perfectly
Natural result of having real problems
that are neglected and
so simply
saying we understand it is it is a
struggle right now there are a lot of
problems facing young men and we are on
it I can't I cannot tell you how
powerful I think that would be because
so so many men feel right now as if
their problems are sort of second order
problems they just don't count as much
they're not being addressed in the same
way or if they are it's turned back on
them it's because you don't try it's
because you're lazy it's because you
watch too much porn it's because you're
toxic it's what so individualize back on
them and you need to fix yourself and I
think if we were just if we were just
able to say we can do two things at once
and we can continue to fight for women
and girls but we can also help you boys
and men I think it would be profound
it's so clearly so important to that
group in particular as well because
letting them know that they are seen in
a situation where they they are already
unbelievably
alone in the sense of
loneliness um is especially powerful and
I think just from having these
conversations on the podcast I've seen
that I've seen that
um I've seen that just by having the
conversations even if we don't have all
the solutions yet just by turning the
lights on and saying okay this is a
thing people are so unbelievably
grateful and it's not just men that are
grateful if you look at the the gender
split on the podcast that I've done with
um men and women on these male issues
the comment section are full of mothers
and grandmothers and sisters um and
daughters who are equally concerned
about men and boys in the same way that
we should all be concerned about the
issues that women and girls face and I
think that's a really wonderful thing
because I feel like someone said to me
on the podcast you know we've spent a
long time calling men out and now we
need to call them back in yes and I
think it's just a wonderful expression
of um where I think we find ourselves at
where we're now trying to figure out how
we co coexist and champion each other
and the individual issues we both have
is um two different Sexes and um well
thank you for your work in this space I
do think that using your
platform to honestly engage to to
Grapple with this is in the way that we
have today and you have with others and
just there aren't eat as hard I think
that's an incredibly important thing
because if you're not talking about it
others will be and so for you to use
your voice and this kind of space to
just say we get it we're hearing you
we're seeing it we maybe don't have the
answer it's very powerful for you to use
your voice to do that and I'm glad
you're getting the reaction that you are
which is to a much lesser extent in my
the reaction I get too which is thank
God because you're not framing it in a
reactionary way you're not saying and
that's why we need to go back to the 50s
men were men and women were you're
saying no no this is hard right but
yeah we see it yeah and I I love the
progress we've made as a society um I
love that I love it for all the women in
my lives I love it for myself I love it
for my sister for my mother for my
partner for all the wonderful women that
work with me but I also know that with
all with all upsides comes a unintended
consequence as well and if we can um
manage that if we can manage both the
upside and sustain that while managing
the unintended consequence and talk
about it and this is something this is
not just about socialis it's about medic
we're talking before about medicine or
any other you know being really
successful in work comes with an
unintended consequence over here right
you lose your friends or you might
become lonely if we can highlight both
and manage both and talk about both and
I think we'll we'll be much better as a
society and if we're much better as a
society then I think we'll be much
better um we'll all be happier and we'll
all be better and it's it's difficult to
have these conversation sometimes
because obviously this is these are such
polarizing issues yes but what the what
the [__] am are we here for if not to
have those conversations if you as you
speak about this stuff and I found
myself doing it a bit in this
conversation you think like what's the
what's the kind of least generous
interpretation of what I've just said
yeah that someone's going to post
somewhere right and but if if if you if
we constantly worried about what the
least generous interpretation of what
we're saying is we'll never say anything
100% And and so just by saying it and
trying to be honest about it and
changing your mind but just having I
think you're proving this that the
appetite for good faith convers ations
about real issues is huge right now I
think people kind of over the
simplification they're over the
algorithm they're over the sound but now
we're all kind of in it still but but
just honestly wrestling with real
problems and seeing that we have to rise
together I think that's a huge gift we
have a closing tradition on this podcast
where the last guest leaves a question
for the next guest not knowing who
they're leaving it for awesome I'm
assuming that's the last one yeah must
be there's no other yeah it is okay
interesting they've written a statement
at the top which is someday is now full
stop and then they've written at your
age at this point in your journey what
is one thing you always swore you would
do one day have you done it yet and if
not why
not I can't answer that
question I'm trying really hard
because I'm trying to think of anything
that I have sworn I will do one day
and I can't think of a single thing
Richard thank you thank you it's been
such a wonderful conversation for so
many reasons and um you know I have zero
doubt that there are so many so many men
and women out there that are have
benefited tremendously from the fact
that you do the work that you do in the
way that you do it and I think that's a
really important additional part to the
sentence which is the way in which you
do it tone matters right it really
really matters it really matters because
think you're able to call everybody into
the room um in a way that other people
aren't they call half of the group into
the room or just some of the group into
the room which I I never think is the
best way to get ideas across
but really skillfully in your book but
in your work more generally you call
everybody into the room and you you do
it in a way which is objective it's not
political um and it's incredibly
powerful and compelling and that's
exactly what your your book was I spent
a long time after having multiple
conversations on this podcast looking
for the book that sets the right tone
and can speak to someone like me who
considers myself I'm not sure if this is
always true because I said biases and
stuff but considers myself right in the
middle in terms of politics and all
these things so your book was it didn't
seem to be pandering to either group it
seemed to be able to maintain an
absolute objectivity which was
incredibly powerful but everything is
supported by data and stats not just
Vibes and I think that is the book that
Society is need and I think it is this
book so I'd highly recommend everybody
give it a read if you have any interest
in these subjects we've discussed today
I'm going to link it below for everyone
um it's called of boys and men why the
modern male is struggling why it matters
and what to do about it um but also for
all of the millions of people listening
right now um thank you because I'm sure
all of them would like to say thank you
for you for for variety of different
reasons but on behalf of them thank you
so much for doing the work that you do
it's very very important and to kind of
close off this conversation thank it
means a lot to me we say that oh thank
you we need you too
[Music]